DuckDB loader example (#1371)
observablehq/framework: examples/loader-duckdb/src/index.md

# DuckDB data loader

> Here’s a bash data loader that uses curl to download a CSV file from Eurostat (the data portal from the statistical office of the European Union), then calls [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) to filter it and saves the result as [Apache Parquet](https://observablehq.com/framework/lib/arrow#apache-parquet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s a shell script data loader that uses curl to download a CSV file, then uses the [DuckDB CLI](https://duckdb.org/docs/api/cli/overview.html) to filter it, and finally outputs the result as [Apache Parquet](https://observablehq.com/framework/lib/arrow#apache-parquet).
```

> The example illustrates the technique with statistics about education to modern foreign languages across Europe ([educ_uoe_lang01](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/educ_uoe_lang01/default/table?lang=en&category=educ.educ_lang.educ_uoe_lang)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example data is statistics about the education of modern foreign languages ([educ_uoe_lang01](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/educ_uoe_lang01/default/table?lang=en&category=educ.educ_lang.educ_uoe_lang)) from Eurostat, the data portal of the statistical office of the European Union.
```

> The data loader lives in [`src/educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh`](./src/educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This link won’t work here.

> The data loader lives in [`src/educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh`](./src/educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh).

Author: ```suggestion
The data loader lives in [`src/educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh`](https://github.com/observablehq/framework/blob/main/examples/loader-duckdb/src/educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh).
```

> Because the Eurostat API does not compress data as part of the http response, but instead offers to send compressed data, we download it outside of DuckDB — here using [curl](https://curl.se/) — then uncompress it with [gunzip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gzip). The raw file is saved to a temporary directory, which makes it much faster to iterate on the data loader when we want to tweak the query, for example to change the education level or the time period considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the Eurostat API does not compress data as part of the http response, but instead offers to send compressed data, we download it outside of DuckDB — here using [curl](https://curl.se/) — then uncompress it with [gunzip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gzip). The raw file is saved to a temporary directory, which makes it much faster to iterate on the data loader when we want to tweak the query, for example to change the education level or the time period considered.
```

My impression is that we’re downloading it outside of DuckDB mostly so that we can cache the downloaded file, rather than downloading it each time we run the data loader? Though the risk of that approach is that we must remember to clear a separate cache directory in `$TMPDIR` rather than the normal one in `.observablehq/cache`. So, can we use the latter instead, so that clearing the cache will re-download the file? I would think that using the existing cache would be a best practice that we should recommend.

Author: Unfortunately the Eurostat API does not send "csv on an http gziped connection", but instead sends a gzip file ("compressed csv"). I haven't managed to access it directly with DuckDB.

Author: I've adopted `.observablehq/cache`; I'm using a subfolder though, to separate the data loader output from its framework copy (even though it works locally if we cat from a file to stdout, then let framework overwrite the file… it felt dangerous).

```sh
export CODE="educ_uoe_lang01"
export URL='https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/api/dissemination/sdmx/2.1/data/'$CODE'/?format=SDMX-CSV&compressed=true&i'

if [ ! -f "$TMPDIR/$CODE.csv.gz" ]; then curl "$URL" --output $TMPDIR/$CODE.csv.gz; fi
gunzip --keep $TMPDIR/$CODE.csv.gz

duckdb :memory: << EOF
COPY (
  SELECT *
  FROM read_csv('$TMPDIR/$CODE.csv')
  WHERE true
    AND TIME_PERIOD = 2019 -- a good year in terms of data quality
    AND OBS_VALUE > 0 -- filter out zeros
    AND isced11 = 'ED2' -- lower secondary education
    AND unit = 'PC' -- ignore absolute numbers, keep percentages
    AND language != 'TOTAL' -- ignore total
    AND length(geo) = 2 -- ignore groupings such as EU_27
) TO '$TMPDIR/$CODE.parquet' (COMPRESSION gzip);
EOF
cat $TMPDIR/$CODE.parquet >&1  # Write output to stdout
rm $TMPDIR/$CODE.csv $TMPDIR/$CODE.parquet  # Clean up
```

<div class="note">

> To run this data loader, you’ll need to install the `duckdb` binary, as well as `curl` and `gunzip` if they are not already available on your system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run this data loader, you’ll need to install the DuckDB CLI (`duckdb`), as well as `curl` and `gunzip` if they are not already installed on your system.
```

</div>

The above data loader lives in `educ_uoe_lang01.parquet.sh`, so we can load the data as `educ_uoe_lang01.parquet`. The `FileAttachment.parquet` method parses the file and returns a promise to an Arrow table.

```js echo
const languages = FileAttachment("educ_uoe_lang01.parquet").parquet();
```

We can display this dataset with Inputs.table:

```js echo
Inputs.table(languages)
```

> We can also make a quick chart of the state of learning of modern foreign languages in European countries using [Observable Plot](https://observablehq/com/plot/); note that the stacked percentages go above 100% in most countries because a lot of pupils learn at least two foreign languages. Ireland (IE) is the only exception (as English is not taught as a foreign language).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also make a quick chart of most-frequently taught modern foreign languages in Europe using [Observable Plot](https://observablehq.com/plot/); note that the stacked percentages go above 100% in most countries because many pupils learn at least two foreign languages. Ireland (IE) is the only exception as English is not taught as a foreign language.
```

Did I interpret this right?
